---
title: 'Loading GIFs should die'
layout: post
published: false
---

Loading GIF spinners are awful. They turn my attention away from the site/app and direct it to my Internet connection: “Damn, you’re super slow!”. Even though my connection could be good—it’s just preloading the 20MB of assets of your SPA (Single Page Application).

I understand why folks use them, though.

One reason is because they want to provide an immersive, complete experience. For example, Apple wants to prepare a nice experience and avoid the event of the iPhone screenshot download before the phone’s frame.

[image of Apple, Gmail, Amazon loading]
<figcaption>Obstructive loading animation of Apple, Amazon, Gmail.</figcaption>

Another reason is when you bring new data with AJAX the default browser page loading animation isn’t triggered. So you need to show that something is happening on the page.

## Show nothing
Even though I know that you’re customising the experience for me, I prefer you showed nothing. At least then I can see the image being downloaded, or the blank page filling in—I can observe real progress being made.

[image with half image/page loaded]
<figcaption>My face being downloaded (JPG progressive). Flickr page loading.</figcaption>

I don’t have to wait until after the site has finished downloading everything to browse the page. A loading GIF spinner, due to its nature, is static, though moving, and shows no progress whatsoever.

## 1px progress bar
A new trend is to show a 1px progress bar at the top of the page (YouTube, Medium, etc.) to indicate something is happening.

[image 1px border animation]

Slightly better than the looping GIF spinner but still no *real* progress is shown. Wow, I’m rooting for a 1px line to fill-up! That’s exactly what I wanted to see when I clicked that link.

## Best solution
Make your app and website faster so I don’t have to see any loading GIFs or progress bars! Minimise design clutter, use fast servers and CDNs, minify your code, optimise your images, cache everything, and all that jazz. One site I constantly mention for being fast is [Medium](http://medium.com)—blazing fast!

If you want to take it a step further, adopt smart loading techniques, like downloading the images in order of appearance, use [progressive JPEGs](http://blog.patrickmeenan.com/2013/06/progressive-jpegs-ftw.html), only load scripts upon request, and [preload hovered links](http://instantclick.io/). This preloading technique applies to apps as well. Load only part of the app, and preload the next section of the app only after the user has moused-over a certain area. Prioritise content: load the logo, footer, sidebar, and ads after the main content has finished loading. Save stuff to the browser’s LocalStorage. Infinite scrolling? Make it fast! A note on performance: disable animations when scrolling so that it’s smooth, and [hardware accelerate](http://blog.teamtreehouse.com/increase-your-sites-performance-with-hardware-accelerated-css) CSS animations.

I love how Vimeo starts loading the video once you hover it, and by the time you’ve reached the *Play* button it’s already loaded 6 seconds or so. Instant gratification! Try it out below:

<iframe src="//player.vimeo.com/video/36277251?byline=0&amp;portrait=0" width="800" height="355" frameborder="0" webkitallowfullscreen mozallowfullscreen allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Conclusion
I consider speed to be a design feature. You already know that slow websites lose customers and also get “punished” by Google’s search engine. Adding a loading GIF showing that something is loading won’t save your slow website.

So please, make your website/app faster and get rid of that obstructing, annoying loading GIF. I needed to see that cat [buttwiggle](http://imgur.com/gallery/xBrHq) yesterday!!

P.S. Although I optimised, and tried to guess your moves, on my photos page, you might still see a loading GIF (if your connection is slow).